# Music Genre Classification Based on Lyrics

Jingyi (Wengie) Wang: jwang862@wisc.edu   
Yezhou Li: yli967@wisc.edu

# Abstract 
We use machine learning algorithms to classify music genres based on lyrics. By concentrating our research on music lyrics, we hope to understand the importance of lyrics in shaping the type of music we listen to. In this project, we examine several classification algorithms to predict the genre for songs from the Million Song Dataset (MSD) using genre labels extracted from the Last.FM dataset for ground true labels. The models we use include Logistic Regression, Doc2Vec Logistic Regression, Random Forest, Bag-of-Word with Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). Our analysis using the balanced MSD yielded promising results of 54.57\% test accuracy using simple Logistic Regression for classification of six genres. We improve the test accuracy to 63.76\% using Doc2Vec Logistic Regression model because instead of analyzing independent words, this model extracts lyrical features from sentences and documents. We also try the Random Forest model on our balanced dataset for classification of both six output classes and binary output classes, with test accuracies of 14.86\% and 57.91\% respectively. Then we try more complex models like MLP and RNN. Though MLP with weighted loss yields 54.71\% test accuracy, the loss function for the validation set doesn’t converge, indicating an overfitting and random guessing problem. As we tried RNN-LSTM, we encounter the same problem and are not able to get the loss converged. We surmise that the extremely imbalanced dataset, similarities in genre, lack of colloquial vocabulary in the word model, and weak association between lyrics and genre hindered the performance of genre prediction with lyrics.
